The Colossus computer was constructed in England in 1943 to decode messages
transmitted by the Germans during the Second World War. Alan M. Turing, the famous
British mathematician, helped in the development of the world's first electronic computer.
An ENIGMA machine that was used by the Germans to encode messages had fallen into
the hands of the British Intelligence. Huge amounts of computation were needed to break
coded messages. The development of Colossus was kept secret for many years.

Howard H. Aiken of Harvard University (in cooperation with IBM) produced in 1944 an
all-electronic calculator based on relays for the development of ballistic charts by the
U.S. Navy. The Mark I calculator occupied very substantial space and included about 500
miles of wiring. Electromagnetic signals were used to drive mechanical parts. Grace
Murray Hopper was a famous programmer of Mark I at the Harvard Computation Center;
she was a U.S. Navy lieutenant.

The Second World War forced several governments to put serious effort in the
development of electronic computers for the design of missiles and aircraft, and message
decoding. Such a powerful computer was the Electronic Numerical Integrator And
Computer (ENIAC) that was developed for the U.S. government at the University of
Pennsylvania by John Presper Eckert, Jr. and John W. Mauchly. With their staff of
fourteen people, they worked on the design and construction of ENIAC from 1943 to
1945. They were located at the Moore School of Electrical Engineering in the University
of Pennsylvania. ENIAC's first application was in nuclear science for the Manhattan
Project. It contained about 18,000 vacuum tubes, 70,000 resistors, and 1,500 relays. It
consumed 160 KiloWatts of electrical power and weighted 30 tons. Its large power
consumption was the result of a large number of vacuum tubes. Vacuum tubes contain a
heater element that displaces electrons. The heater burns out after a few thousand hours
of operation. ENIAC was running without faults for one to two days, on the average. It
performed about 5,000 operations per second. It was about 1,000 times faster than Mark I
and was developed as a general-purpose computer. It had only twenty memory locations
that each could store a signed 10-digit decimal number.

To program the ENIAC, individual units had to be connected together with wires, and
switches were set appropriately to control the sequence of operations. Mauchly met
Atanasoff in 1940 and they exchanged ideas about electronic computers. As discussed
earlier, a U.S. federal judge decided in 1973 that the ENIAC was based on several design
concepts introduced earlier by Atanasoff. However, the 100,000 pulses per second
decimal ENIAC yielded better performance than Atanasoff's 60 pulses per second ABC
binary machine. The core of the ENIAC programmers consisted of six women, called
"computers." It was in operation for ten years, from November 1945 until October 1955.
It operated at the Moore School until 1947 in the "direct programming" rewiring mode. It
was then moved to the Ballistics Research Laboratory (BRL) of the Aberdeen Proving
Ground in Maryland, where it operated in the "converter code" mode. The ENIAC
computer produced the correct solution to problems only 54% of the time while at BRL.
Mauchly claimed that the value was 90% while the ENIAC was at the Moore School.